1.  DataBase Overview

The Item-Minder Database app is a simple database that helps keep track of collections of items. This could be anything such as DVD's, CD's, Tools, you name it.  If you are out and about and are wondering if that DVD in the five dollar bin at Walmart is already in your collection, this app will help.  You can bring up the DVD table from your INI list (more on this later) and search for the title. If you have it, the search will find it in your database. If not, buy it and update the database for next time.

Like anything, the database is only as good as its upkeep.  If you buy items and forget to update the database on your mobile device, you will not know if you have it next time you look.

This desktop application is a database management tool that allows easier generation and upkeep.  You can generate the initial database using the keyboard and mouse instead of the virtual keyboard on your mobile device. Then if you purchase several items for your collection, it might be easier to update your databases using this tool.  Then upload them to your mobile device.

The database used in this application is sqlite.  It is a pared down (lite) version of the larger sql databases such as Sequel and Postgres. The big difference is the database (or multiple databases) are contained in simple files on the device.  Because of this, sqlite database support is built in to most if not all mobile devices.  

The app has a "default.db" file that contains one database table that is suitable to track a DVD collection. It is organized as:

    Table Name:    dvd

    Schema:        1-Title
                   2-Lead_Star
                   3-Release_Year
                   4-Genre
                   5-Collection
                   6-Location
                   7-Rating
                   8-Misc

where Title, Lead_Star, Release_Year, and Genre are self-evident.  Collection indicates if the movie is part of a collection of movies on a single DVD. Location can be used to indicate a location for the DVD (i.e. Book 2, Page 30 if it is in a DVD book). Rating is self-evident and can be any rating system you choose (i.e. 1-5 stars etc). Misc can be used for any extra information you wish to store about the DVD. You can use this setup or delete it and define your own.

Every database you define will have a "Table" name, and eight parameters in its schema list. Each of the descriptors stored for each of the schema is stored as a string.  So it can contain anything, but remember that you will be searching based on these strings.  So try to stick to a convention that will be easy to remember when entering a search parameter (descriptor).

for instance, if you wish to search for a DVD Title:

    Search for:  Title="Avatar"

If you capitalize "Avatar,"  but don't capitalize "castaway," you may end up not finding it if you search for "Castaway."  So define an easy to remember convention and stick to it for each descriptor.

You may have a database (table) for "dvd", "cd", "hometools", "worktools" or you may have a hobby that incorporates a long list of items that need to be tracked.  All of these database tables can be in one file or in multiple files (database file "anyfilename.db"). You are only limited by the size of your devices memory. But the unless they are very large databases, the size should not be prohibitive.

You might want to add the following database if you have a home shop:

    Table:    homeshoptools     or     CDsAtOffice
    Schema:   Tool_Name                Band
              Size                     Album
              Orientation              Year
              Manufacturer             Lead_Singer
              Partof_Set               Genre
              On_Loan                  Collection
              Location                 Location
              Misc                     Rating

The possibilities are endless.
              
The setup for the mobile app is defined in the "db.ini" file. Any number of databases can be added to the INI setup file for use on the mobile app.  Use this management utility to enter the setup and the items into the database and then upkeep them.

1.1	Add Item

Items define your database. To add an item into your database, you need only to hit the "Add Entry" button on the main window of the utility.  You will be redirected to a new window that allows entry for all of the descriptors that describe the item.  

Once you complete the entry of the descriptors for the item, hit the "Add Entry" button and it will be added into the main window scrolling display and the database.  If you wish to add more than one item, simply tab through the entry windows again and enter the descriptors for the next item. Then each time you hit the "Add Entry" button, a new entry will be added.

When finished, hit "Exit" to return to the main window.

1.2 	Delete Item

To delete a row from the scrolling display and the database, single-click on the item in the scrolling display and hit the "Delete Entry" button on the main window.  This will delete the item from the database as well as the scrolling display.

The utility will prompt you to ensure you want to delete the item.  If you do, hit the "Yes" button on the warning dialog.  If you mistakenly hit the delete button, simply hit "No" and you will be returned with no damage done.

1.3	Search Items

This is the main operation you will be doing on your mobile device, but you may want to search the database in the utility as well.  To do this, four combo boxes with text entries are provided to accomplish this.  

Click on the down arrow of one of the combo boxes and select the schema entry you wish to search.  Then enter the descriptor for that schema i.e:

	schema - "Release_year"  Text entry - "2012"

you may find multiple DVD's with that release year.  To narrow the search further, you may in the next combo box/text pair enter Genre="comedy."  You can use all four of the entries to narrow the search.

The search is accomplished by pressing the "Search Database" button at the top of the main window. Once you find the item you are searching for (and edit it if desired), press the "Display All" button in the menu.  This will return all of the items to the display (with any updated entries).

1.4 Edit Item

If you perform a search and have the item you were looking for in the display, double-click on the item and you will be taken to the same window as the "Add Entry" displayed.  The difference is it will now contain the data for the selected item.  You may now edit this data and update it in the database and the display. 

Hit the "Update Entry" to update the item in the database and the display.  Hit the "Exit" button to return to the main window.

2.  File Operations

File operations within the utility allow you to update existing or create new files.  These files can be filled with existing database tables or new tables can be created.

This section of the utility is strictly for convenience on the desktop.  Once the databases are uploaded to the mobile device, there will be no file operations associated.  The INI file will define all of the databases accessible to the app, and they will all be preexisting, and contained within the same directory.

2.1	File Open

If the file open is selected, a file open dialog will allow the selection of an existing database file.  If a file (that is different than the one currently open) is selected, it will be opened and the "File_Tables" menu entry will contain all of the database tables contained in the file.  

Now you can drop the "File_Tables" menu entry and select one of the database table names to edit that database.  

If the file selected is the same as the currently opened file, you will get a file open error.  If this happens simply select "Close" first to close the current file.  Then try again.

2.2	File New

This is similar to file open except that you can enter a new file name and the file will be created. If you open a new file, you will be prompted to enter a "Table" name and the schema for a new database table (each database file must contain at least one database table).

Once this is entered, you will be able to add items to your new database and edit them at will.

2.3	File Close

As outlined in file open, this menu entry will simply close the currently opened database file.  This way if it was opened from an INI entry (more later), but there are more tables that are not in the INI list, you can close it and reopen it from the file menu and all of the database tables contained in the file will be displayed in the "File_Tables" menu entry.

2.4	File SaveAs

This is an entry you may never need, but if you want to copy the current database table to a new file, this entry will allow you to do that.  

If the table you want to copy is currently open, select this from the "File" menu and select the new file you want to copy it to.  Once the copy is complete, you can open that file and edit the new table as you would the original.

3.  INI Overview

The INI file is the main configuration source for your whole setup.  The mobile app reads this file and gives the option to select any of the databases (You give a descriptive name to select from in the INI) available.  This gives you the ability to keep track of multiple sets of items for various pursuits.

There are two sections in the INI file.  The first under the key "DataBase Set N" where N is 1 to N databases in the INI.  This section provides the location and naming portions of the database description.

    [DataBase Set 1]
    name=Home DVDs        #displayed in the app
    dbtable=hdvd1         #used by sqlite
    path= /path to db/    #only used in the desktop 
                           utility
    fname=default.db      #file name that contains the 
                           table above

This gives the descriptive "name" that will be displayed in the list for you to select in the mobile app.  Next is the database table name "dbtable," that selects the correct table if there are multiple in the same file.  The path is only used on the desktop utility and is ignored on the mobile device.  The "fname" is the file name where the table resides.

The second key is the "Item Set N" that describes the schema that matches the selected database table.  The INI must give all eight values for the schema:

    [Item Set 1]
    value1 = Title
    value2 = Lead_Star
    value3 = Release_Year
    value4 = Genre
    value5 = Collection
    value6 = Location
    value7 = Misc1
    value8 = Misc2

Notice that the schema values for the database table do not have any spaces.  If you want to separate portions (or words) in the strings, use underscores.

Note Note Note: The schema entered here must (MUST) match the schema in the database (entered when you create the database.  If this is not ensured, you will not be able to search the database. So if you create a database and add a section to the INI, do not edit the schema in the INI. (Unless you really know what you are doing) 

3.1	INI Add Section

Once you create the database desired, you can select "Add Section to INI.." to add all of the information necessary to load and access the database to the INI file.  This is necessary for use on the mobile app.  If the sections defining the database are not in the INI file, you will not be able to display or search the database even if it is resident in one of the ".db" files on the device.

A good work-flow for creating a database would look like:

     1- Open a new file (or existing file)
     2- Select "File_Tables" and then 
        "Create New Table..."
     3- Enter the information in the popup that 
        describes the database you want.
     4- Select "File_Tables" again and select your table.
     5- Add in the information for your items.
     6- Once everything is as you want it, select 
        "INI_Tables"
     7- Then select "Add Section to INI..."
     8- Ensure all of the information is correct.
     9- Add the section
     10-Edit the INI file if desired and add comments.

Once the database file and INI file are uploaded to the mobile device, the new database should be select-able from the list.

4.  Mobile Device Setup
